% Template for PLoS

\documentclass[10pt]{article}

% amsmath package, useful for mathematical formulas
\usepackage{amsmath}
% amssymb package, useful for mathematical symbols
\usepackage{amssymb}

% hyperref package, useful for hyperlinks
\usepackage{hyperref}

% graphicx package, useful for including eps and pdf graphics
% include graphics with the command \includegraphics
\usepackage{graphicx}

% Sweave(-like)
\usepackage{fancyvrb}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Sinput}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Soutput}{Verbatim}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Scode}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\newenvironment{Schunk}{}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Code}{Verbatim}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{CodeInput}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{CodeOutput}{Verbatim}{}
\newenvironment{CodeChunk}{}{}

% cite package, to clean up citations in the main text. Do not remove.
\usepackage{cite}

\usepackage{color}

% Use doublespacing - comment out for single spacing
%\usepackage{setspace}
%\doublespacing


% Text layout
\topmargin 0.0cm
\oddsidemargin 0.5cm
\evensidemargin 0.5cm
\textwidth 16cm
\textheight 21cm

% Bold the 'Figure #' in the caption and separate it with a period
% Captions will be left justified
\usepackage[labelfont=bf,labelsep=period,justification=raggedright]{caption}

% Use the PLoS provided bibtex style
\bibliographystyle{plos}

% Remove brackets from numbering in List of References
\makeatletter
\renewcommand{\@biblabel}[1]{\quad#1.}
\makeatother


% Leave date blank
\date{}

\pagestyle{myheadings}
%% ** EDIT HERE **


%% ** EDIT HERE **
%% PLEASE INCLUDE ALL MACROS BELOW

%% END MACROS SECTION


\begin{document}

% Title must be 150 characters or less
\begin{flushleft}
{\Large
\textbf{Examining the explanatory model of the cultural continuity of an
archaeological site in Taiwan}
}
% Insert Author names, affiliations and corresponding author email.
\\
  Liying Wang\textsuperscript{1*}\\
\bf{1} Department of Anthropology, University of Washington,  Seattle,  Washington,  USA
\\

\textasteriskcentered{} E-mail:   \href{mailto:liying15@uw.edu}{\nolinkurl{liying15@uw.edu}}

\end{flushleft}

\section*{Introduction}\label{introduction}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Introduction}

In this paper, I will focus on a debate about whether separate cultural
layers in Kiwulan (KWL) site in Northern Taiwan belong to the same
prehistoric ethnic group. The KWL site is located at Ilan city and near
a riverside at northern margin of the Ilan plain in Northeastern Taiwan.
The site was excavated during 2001 to 2003 by the Department of
Anthropology of National Taiwan University (Chen 2007). According to
archaeological remains, the site can be divided into a lower culture
layer and an upper culture layer, dating from 1300B.P. to 800B.P. and
600B.P. to 100B.P.respectively based on radiocarbon dates. However,
there is a debate about whether the archaeological remains from both
layers belong to the same culture or not, because the archaeological
remains show both similar and different patterns. Chen argued that these
two layers belong to the same culture based on similar pattern of
artifacts (Chen 2004). However, Chiu (2004) stated that they belong to
different culture or ethnic group due to distinct styles of mortuary
practice. The difference of these explanations shows distinct
explanatory models in terms of archaeological evidence. For the
following sections, I will examine these two explanations based on
archaeological evidence, explore the philosophical theories behinds
them, discuss their strength and weakness, and then conclude that Chen's
argument might be more appropriate in this case. However, both
explanations still need clear theoretical framework, and the combination
of these two models might be a better solution to this debate.

\section*{Archaeological evidence}\label{archaeological-evidence}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Archaeological evidence}

The excavation of Kiwulan site covered an area of 2,800 sqm and revealed
hundreds of thousands of artifacts from a total of 262 archaeological
excavation areas. The following is the archaeological evidence found in
these layers respectively.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  Lower culture layer (1300-800 B.P)
\end{enumerate}

The archaeological evidence include a wide variety of pottery, post
holes, slabs which are associated with households, 35 burials, few iron
knifes and artifacts, grinding stones, slabs, imported ornaments such as
glass beads, agate beads, metal bracelet, glass earrings, fauna remains
such as deer and pigs. There is no much evidence relates to practices of
agriculture. In addition, hunting and gathering are believed as the main
subsistence in this period. For the potteries, there are different kinds
of shape and form, including bowls, vessels, and pots. The most common
type of pottery is the pottery with stamped geometric decoration.
Although there are many types of pottery in living area, only geometric
decoration pottery and plain vessels found in burials as burial goods.
In addition to pottery, imported ornaments are often used as burial
goods. For burials, secondary burial is the most common type, and slabs
were used to serve as funerary utensils. The people abandoned this
settlement around 800B.P due to environmental changes (Chen 2007).

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\setcounter{enumi}{1}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  Upper culture layer (600-100 B.P.)
\end{enumerate}

The archaeological remains found in this period were more than lower
culture layer. The archaeological evidence includes pottery, imported
ceramics and stonewares, wooden artifacts such as table wares and tools,
grinding stones, metal artifacts such as knives and points, imported
ornaments such as glass beads, agates beads, and metal bracelets, pipes
which made of stone, clay, and metal, local ornaments made of animal
bones, shells, and wood, and fauna assemblage. In addition to artifacts,
90 burials and wooden pole structures were also excavated. These wooden
poles were found aligned in a north-south direction with construction
marks, which were interpreted as remains of house structures. The
distribution of features shows that the cemetery is located at the north
part of house structures, which indicates the settlement was organized
in some order. According to historical records, this settlement was
believed as the biggest settlement in the 17th century. The potteries
were usually decorated with geometric design, which is similar to the
pottery in earlier period. For burials, the common funerary utensils
were wooden boards. In addition to imported ornaments, imported ceramics
were also the common burials goods (Chen 2007).

\section*{Links between evidence and
behavior}\label{links-between-evidence-and-behavior}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Links between evidence and behavior}

Chen (2004, 2007) focused on similar archaeological remains in both
layers. He pointed out the similarity of burial goods, such as local
pottery, glass beads, and agate beads. Although forms and shapes of
beads are not completely the same in both layers, he argued that the
distribution or pattern of burial goods is similar. Agate beads and
glass beads usually served as necklaces on deceased, and some small
beads reveal that they were part of the decoration of clothes. In
addition to beads, pottery is the common burial good in both layers. He
states that the people from these two periods have similar mortuary
practice based on the distribution of burial goods, especially for
pottery and glass beads. Moreover, the pattern of pottery in both layers
shows the similar surface treatment, stamped geometric decoration, which
also indicates the same system of decoration and technique for making
pots. For house structures, both periods were found post holes and
wooden poles, which indicates they might have similar household form and
structure. Chen (2004) linked the archaeological evidence with human
behaviors at household level, and viewed these human behaviors as an
entity, which reflects settlement level. He stated that the similarity
of artifacts of two cultural layers indicates the cultural transmission
in a singular culture, in which cultural elements transmits from people
to people, and from generation to generation.

On the other hand, Chiu (2004) stresses the difference between these two
layers mainly based on mortuary practice. The common burial in lower
cultural layer is secondary burials and the people usually used slabs as
funeral utensils; however, most burials in upper culture layer are
primary with bodies in flexed position. Moreover, wood is the common
funeral utensil in upper culture layer rather than slabs. Although
people from both layers used beads as burial goods, forms and shapes
shows slightly difference. For example, the lower culture layer was
found glass earrings, which is absent in upper culture layer. Based on
Person (1999) arguments, he stated that mortuary practices are social
and political behaviors. Mortuary practices and associated burial goods
are not only artifacts, but also rules and custom related to the core
element of a culture (Pearson 1999). Besides, he believed that mortuary
practice usually links to rituals, worldviews, and the view of life and
death of an ethnic group. These viewpoints for mortuary practice of an
ethnic group seldom change and will pass down from generation to
generation unless they face significant influence. Therefore, he stated
that the people from two layers belong to different cultures, because
their mortuary practices are different, and there is no relevant
evidence shows any factor that will affect the culture change if they
are the same ethnic group. Regarding the similar burials goods found
from both layers, he argued that the burial goods such as glass beads
were imported materials, which indicates the common interaction between
Northern Taiwan and Southeast China in the prehistoric period rather
than the preference of a culture (Chiu 2004).

\section*{Discussion}\label{discussion}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Discussion}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  Context of the explanatory mode
\end{enumerate}

The same culture hypothesis is based on the similar human practice on
the daily life, such as making pattern, living, and mortuary practices.
This viewpoint stresses that we should examine the artifacts as a whole.
Chen stated that if we focus on singular artifact, we might think these
remains belong to different groups. But when examining all of the
archaeological remains together, both layers indicate similar pattern of
artifacts and shows some continuity of cultural elements. I think this
argument is based on the inference to the best explanation (Lipton
2004). In addition, Chen focuses on culture elements of these two
layers, which indicates there is a culture transmission from generation
to generation. This assumption to some extent is based on the culture
transmission theory, which stresses the inheritance of cultural elements
to explain human variations (Shennan 2008). The cultural transmission
theory can be viewed as unification, which assumes we can use few core
patterns to describe a wide range of phenomenon. In his case, the
inheritance of cultural elements is the common pattern we can find in
most societies, and it serves as an explanation to interpret the
similarity of two culture layers.

On the other hand, different culture hypothesis assumes that mortuary
practice reflects the view of life and death of an ethnic group, which
is the core element of a culture and seldom changes with time. Chiu
argued that although the style of potteries or households show the
similar pattern in both layers, these cultural elements tend to be
influenced by other culture through frequent interactions. I think
Chiu's (2004) argument is based on the D-N model (Hempel 1962). His
statement is that the ritual is the core cultural element of any human
culture and seldom changes with time unless they face significant
influence. Second statement is that every ethnic group has their
distinct ritual, and the mortuary practice reflects a kind of ritual.
Because there is no evidence shows any factor that affects the change in
mortuary practice if these two periods belongs to the same culture, he
inferred that the people from two layers belong to different groups. In
addition, his argument is also associated with unification (Kitcher
1981).

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\setcounter{enumi}{1}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  Explanatory model and relevant philosophy of science literatures
\end{enumerate}

Inference to the best explanation and unification can be identified in
Chen's argument. Lipton (2004) proposed the model of inference to the
best explanation (IBE) and thought the best explanation is to infer from
the available evidence to the hypothesis which can explain the evidence
well. There are three steps when we make such explanation, including
identifying the explanatory virtues, matching inferential virtues, and
evaluating the match between loveliness and judgments. (Lipton 2004) He
then proposed that a good explanation requires a cause, which can
explain both the fact and the other possible phenomenon. IBE was
supported by Fogelin (2007), who further provided some guildlines for a
best explanation, and argued that such explanation has been used in
archaeology for a long time and can be seen in both processual and
post-processual archaeology (Fogelin 2007). Fogelin suggested that
explanation should explain a greater quantity and diversity of empirical
evidence. In addition, IBE needs to contain other traits, including
generality, modesty, refutability, conservatism, and simplicity.
However, Salmon (2001) criticized that Lipton's IBE model does not
provide a normative basis for judging inference. In addition, it is hard
to determine which is the best explanation duo to many different pieces
of evidence of real case, especially for archaeology (W. C. Salmon
2001).

Another model of explanation can be identified from Chen's and Chiu's
arguments is unification, which means that one pattern of argument
provided by a theory can be used in the derivation of a large number of
sentences (Kitcher 1981). Kitcher (1981) proposed the concept of
``general argument pattern'' to express the structure of the derivations
of the same scientific theory. He thought that all patterns may share a
common core pattern, which is what we need for explanation. Arguments
usually have similar logical structure, in which non-logical vocabulary
could be replaced. Moreover, explanation should be the set of arguments
which best unifies a given phenomenon (Kitcher 1981). However, based on
Wylie's (1996) classification, there are three categories of
philosophical theories about explanation: epistemic theories, ontic
theories, and pragmatic theories. She pointed out the question of
simplification of unification and stated that the power of unification
in Kitcher's account depends on the understanding of mechanisms and
constitution of explanation of causality (Wylie 1996). Therefore, it is
necessary to consider an ontic explanation, that is, causal explanation
or mechanisms rather than just unification.

Deductive-Nomological model (D-N model) is another approach to
scientific explanation, which can be found in Chiu's statement. D-N
model relies on the logic connection and hypothesis building. In the D-N
model, the explanation is divided into two sections, one is explanans,
which includes the premises or statements, and another one is
explanandum, which is the logical consequence of the explanans (Hempel
1962). For example, ``all birds can fly'' is an explanan or premise, and
``eagle is a kind of birds'' is another statement. Then we can derive
the result that eagles can fly, which is the logical consequence of the
explanans. However, Salmon (1982) pointed out that this inferential
conception is based on inductive arguments that conclude highly probable
in relation to the explanatory facts, which means only high probable
results could be viewed as suitable explanatory conditions. That is, D-N
model overlooks the improbable events, which should be also explained
(W. Salmon 1982). By identifying the main arguments from different
explanations of Chen and Chiu, we can understand how were these
explanations given by archaeologists and are able to evaluate their
arguments.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\setcounter{enumi}{2}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  Critique
\end{enumerate}

I think both arguments need clear theoretical frameworks to support
their inferences. Although Chen's argument can explain most
archaeological remains from the site, there is no explanation for the
connection between the lower culture layer and upper culture layer. As
Salmon (2001) said, there is no normative basis for judging inference.
For example, what kind of cultural element can represent an ethnic
group, and why these elements can be transmitted from generation to
generation, or from person to person without change? In other words, it
is necessary to further examine the mechanism of cultural transmission
from lower culture layer to upper culture layer. On the other hand,
Chiu's argument provides the mechanism behinds the mortuary practice and
culture change, which connects the archaeological evidence with the
concept of ethnicity. However, his explanation only relies on the
mortuary practice, which overlooked other possible phenomenon that can
provide clues for the culture continuity. How can we interpret the
culture continuity only based on mortuary practice is the question and
it needs strong theoretical framework and model testing to support it.
Therefore, I think Chiu's argument should also consider other evidence
in order to give a better explanation. Both arguments show their
strengths and flaws, and I proposed that the combination of these two
explanatory models might provide a better explanation.

\section*{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Conclusion}

The culture continuity of the Kiwulan site is an important topic in
Taiwan, because if two culture layers belong to the same ethnic group,
then the site can provide a good source to research the long term change
of a culture. Chen's model, which assumes that we can view these two
layers as a same culture, provides an appropriate explanation based on
most archaeological evidence and the similar cultural elements. However,
his explanation lacks of the explanation of mechanism for the culture
transmission. On the other hand, although Chiu's argument only focuses
on the mortuary practice, he examines the evidence in a fine-grained
way, which provides mechanism for understanding the process.

I think the combination of these two approaches can provide a better
explanation for the culture continuity by applying Glennan's causal
mechanism (Glennan 2010). We can examine the relationship of each type
of archaeological evidence and associated human behavior in a
fine-grained way by scientific methods, such as DNA analysis for human
remains, or technical choice in pottery productions. In a course-grained
way, we can explore the mechanisms of culture change in a ethnic group
based on the general pattern identified by archaeologists from other
places and then formulate a model to test the archaeological evidence
from Kiwulan site. Based on Glennan's causal mechanism approach, we can
combine Chen's culture transmission theory and Chiu's hypothesis testing
in order to obtain a better understanding of the culture continuity of
the Kiwulan site.

\section*{Reference}\label{reference}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Reference}

Chen, Yu-Pei. 2004. ``The Significance of the Kiwulan Site for
Understahnding the Prehistoric Period in Ilan Plain.'' \emph{Ilan
Study}, 1--14.

---------. 2007. \emph{The Excavation Report of the Ki-Wu-Lan Site 1}.
I-lan, Taiwan: Lanyang museum.

Chiu, Hung-Lin. 2004. ``Investigations of Mortuary Behaviors and
Cultural Change of the Kivulan Site in I-Lan County, Taiwan.''
Dissertation, Taipei: Department of Anthropology, National Taiwan
University.

Fogelin, Lars. 2007. ``Inference to the Best Explanation: A Common and
Effective Form of Archaeological Reasoning.'' \emph{American Antiquity}
Vol. 72 (No. 4): pp. 603--25.

Glennan, S. 2010. ``Ephemeral Mechanisms and Historical Explanation.''
\emph{Erkenntnis} 72 (2): 251--66.

Hempel, Carl G. 1962. ``Two Basic Types of Scientific Explanation.''
\emph{Philosophy of Science: The Central Issues}, 685--94.

Kitcher, Philip. 1981. ``Explanatory Unification.'' \emph{Philosophy of
Science}, 507--31.

Lipton, Peter. 2004. ``Inference to the Best Explanation.'' In \emph{A
Companion to the Philosophy of Science}, edited by W.H. Newton-Smith,
184--93. New York: Routledge.

Pearson, Mike P. 1999. \emph{The Archaeology of Death and Burial}. UK:
Sutton: Phoenix Mill.

Salmon, W.C. 1982. ``Causality in Archaeological Explanation.'' In
\emph{Theory and Explanation in Archaeology}, edited by M. Rowlands C.
Renfrew and B. Seagraves, 45--55. Academic Press.

Salmon, Wesley C. 2001. ``Reflections of a Bashful Bayesian: A Reply to
Peter Lipton. In Explanation.'' \emph{Springer Netherlands}, 121--36.

Shennan, Stephen. 2008. ``Evolution in Archaeology.'' \emph{Annual
Review of Anthropology} 37: 75--91.

Wylie, Alison. 1996. ``Unification and Convergence in Archaeological
Explanation: The Agricultural `Wave‐of‐Advance' and the Origins of
Indo‐European Languages.'' \emph{The Southern Journal of Philosophy} 34
(S1): 1--30.

\end{document}

